Restructure AIP-193 (#1426)
googleapis/aip: aip/general/0193.md

information or ask questions to help resolve the issue. It is also
important to [set the right tone][writing-tone] when writing messages.

The following sections describe the fields of `google.rpc.Status`.

### Status.message

> The `message` field is a a developer-facing, human-readable "debug message"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `message` field is a developer-facing, human-readable "debug message"
```
extra `a`

Author: Done.

which **should** be in English. (Localized messages are expressed using

> a `LocalizedMessage` within the `details` field.) Any dynamic aspects of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a `LocalizedMessage` within the `details` field - see [`Status.details`](#status-details).) Any dynamic aspects of
```
Probably worth linking to? I think this link will work...

Author: I think it's better to link to the LocalizedMessage part of the doc (which I haven't updated yet). Adding the link speculatively.

Reviewer: Ah fair point. Thanks

> the message **must** be included as metadata within the `ErrorInfo` message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `message` **must** be included as metadata within the `ErrorInfo` message
```
Nit: consistently format as code when referring to the `field`?

Author: Let's talk about this a bit more - I tend to find that it's worth keeping things not in code font when they're not *explicitly* talking about the field (which this isn't - it's talking about the semantic meaning). I'm happy to be persuaded, and I suspect there will be some areas where I'm inconsistent already... but to my eyes, a page where a huge proportion of the text is in code font ends up being hard to read.

Reviewer: I agree with your position 100%. I think I was getting confused with semantic meaning vs. concrete reference reading the document top to bottom.

Reviewer: That said, my personal tendency is to explicitly state "`message` value" or "the value of `message`" or "the content of `message`" rather than depend on context clues (like code formatting) to do that "comprehension lifting". I'm not too fussed about it though.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. I'd only put the word "message" in quotes when you're referring directly to the field.

> the message **must** be included as metadata within the `ErrorInfo` message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the message **must** be included as metadata within the `ErrorInfo` that appears
```
Sorry, I get tripped up reading "`ErrorInfo` message" when there is no `message` in `ErrorInfo` - I know you are referring to the proto `message`, but in line I think it is a little confusing. Maybe just refer to the `ErrorInfo` as a singular thing that will be in the `details` as I've suggested?

Author: Yup, that definitely works (and I completely understand the tripping up).

Reviewer: Thanks!

> in `details`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in [`Status.details`](#status-details).
```
Linking for linking sake - again, I hope it works.

Author: Done (and because I'm linking to LocalizedMessage before, it doesn't break my personal semi-rule of avoiding linking to the same thing twice in quick succession!)

Reviewer: Good rule. Thanks!

> The message is considered a problem description. It is intended for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `message` is considered a problem description. It is intended for
```
Nit: format as code when referring to the field

Author: Not done yet, for reason above. (If it had been "The value of message" I would have agreed - but this is the concept rather than the field.) But let's leave this conversation so it's easy to find and change if we go with "make it look like code anywhere that it *could* refer to the field.

developers to understand the problem and is more detailed than

> [`ErrorInfo.reason`][ErrorInfo-reason], discussed in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`ErrorInfo.reason`][ErrorInfo-reason], discussed later.
```
The next section is actually about the `Status.code`, so maybe just say `later` and perhaps link to the subheading?

The `[ErrorInfo-reason]` link goes to the googleapis proto btw.

Author: Works for me.

> Messages **should** use simple descriptive language that is easy to understand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `message` **should** use simple descriptive language that is easy to understand
```
Nit: maybe I'm being overzealous here but "message" is so overloaded I get pedantic about how we refer to it.

Author: Another "let's discuss how much we put in code". (I'm absolutely fine with being pedantic, btw - I'm just being pedantic in a different direction. Once we've agreed a direction, we should nitpick as far as possible.)

Reviewer: I'm ok with what you've done here. Resolving.

(without technical jargon) to clearly state the problem that results in an
error, and offer an actionable resolution to it.

For pre-existing (brownfield) APIs which have previously returned errors
without machine-readable identifiers, the value of `message` **must**
remain the same for any given error, as developers have previously had no
option but to use this for error handling. For more information, see

> [Changing Error Messages](#changing-error-messages).

Reviewer: Nit: the `as developers have previously...` portion is Rationale and might be better suited in a dedicated Rationale section for reference. That said, I realize you are working with existing text and I'm not too fussed about it.

Author: Let's leave this comment thread open for now, as I probably don't have the right place to move this to just yet. But I agree on moving it to the rationale eventually.

Author: Ah, now that I've finished the PR, we can potentially action this. I suspect I can just remove:

> as developers have previously had no option but to use this for error handling.

(And keep the link in the following sentence.) Does that sound right?

Author: Done exactly as stated.

### Status.code

The `code` field is the status code, which **must** be the numeric value of
one of the elements of the [`google.rpc.Code`][Code] enum.

> For example, the value 5 is the numeric value of the `NOT_FOUND`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the value `5` is the numeric value of the `NOT_FOUND`
```

Author: Done.

enum element.

### Status.details

> The `details` field allows any multiple distinct messages with

Reviewer: "any multiple distinct messages" reads a little awkwardly to me. What is this trying to say? "any number of distinct messages"?

Author: I agree it's awkward. It's basically trying to say "It's a repeated field, but you can't use the same message more than once". I think "message" makes all of this harder as well. (I haven't got a better alternative yet for that part though.)

Author: (The distinctness is covered later, so I've just removed it. See what you think.)

additional error information to be included, each packed in a
`google.protobuf.Any` message.

Google defines a set of [standard detail payloads][details] for error
details, which cover most common needs for API errors. 
Services **should** use these standard detail payloads when feasible.

Each type of detail payload **must** be included at most once. For
example, there **must not** be more than one [`BadRequest`][BadRequest]
message in the `details`, but there **may** be a `BadRequest` and a
[`PreconditionFailure`][PreconditionFailure].

Structured details with machine-readable identifiers **must** be used so
that users can write code against specific aspects of the error. Error
message strings **may** change over time; however, if an error message
does not have a machine-readable identifier *in addition to* the message,
changing the error message **must** be considered a backwards-incompatible
change. For more information, see
[Changing Error Messages](#changing-error-messages).

> Most details types are optional, but all error responses **must** include
> an `ErrorInfo` message within `details`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All error responses **must** include an `ErrorInfo` in the `details`.
```
I'm just not sure what value the "most are optional" language provides. Could just be me though.

Author: That's fine - removed.

The following sections describe the most common standard detail payloads.

#### ErrorInfo

> The [`ErrorInfo`][ErrorInfo] message is the required way to send a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`ErrorInfo`][ErrorInfo] message is the primary way to send a
```

I know it's existing text, but....kind of want to keep the requirements in AIP-style requirements words, ya know?

Author: Fine by me. Done.

machine-readable identifier. Contextual information **should** be
included in `metadata` in `ErrorInfo` and **must** be included if it
appears within an error message.

The `reason` field is a short snake_case description of the cause of the
error. Error reasons are unique within a particular domain of errors.
The reason **must** be at most 63 characters and match a regular expression of
`[A-Z][A-Z0-9_]+[A-Z0-9]`. (This is UPPER_SNAKE_CASE, without leading
or trailing underscores, and without leading digits.)

> The reason should be terse, but meaningful enough for a human reader to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `reason` **should** be terse, but meaningful enough for a human reader to
```

Author: (Same discussion as elsewhere about fields vs concepts.)

> understand what the reason refers to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
understand what the `reason` refers to.
```

Author: (And again.)

Reviewer: I agree with your approach and Julie +1'd it. Resolving.

Good examples:

- `CPU_AVAILABILITY`
- `NO_STOCK`
- `CHECKED_OUT`
- `AVAILABILITY_ERROR`

Bad examples:

- `THE_BOOK_YOU_WANT_IS_NOT_AVAILABLE` (overly verbose)
- `ERROR` (too general)

The `domain` field is the logical grouping to which the `reason` belongs.

> The error domain  typically the registered service name of the tool or product

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The error domain is typically the registered service name of the tool or product
```

Author: I hadn't even seen this sentence - I've somewhat repeated it later. Changed this whole paragraph.

Author: (I don't think "tool or product" is particularly useful here. Clients are talking to an API - what kind of "tool" is relevant?)

> that  generated the error. The domain must be a globally unique value, and is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that  generated the error. The domain **must** be a globally unique value, and is
```

Author: Done.

typically the service name, e.g. `pubsub.googleapis.com`.

> The (reason, domain) pair form a machine-readable way of identifying a particular error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The (`reason`, `domain`) pair form a machine-readable way of identifying a particular error.
```
Here and elsewhere

Author: Same response :)

Reviewer: I agree with your approach and Julie +1'd it. Resolving.

Services **must** use the same (reason, domain) pair for the same error, and
**must not** use the same (reason, domain) pair for logically different errors.
The decision about whether two errors are "the same" or not is not always clear, but

> should generally be considered in terms of the expected action a client might take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**should** be considered in terms of the expected action a client might take
```

Author: Done.

to resolve them.

The `metadata` field is a map of key/value pairs providing additional
dynamic information as context. Each key within `metadata` **must** be at most
64 characters long, and conform to the regular expression `[a-z][a-zA-Z0-9-_]+`.

Any request-specific information which contributes to the `Status.message` or
`LocalizedMessage.message` messages **must** be represented within `metadata`.
This practice is critical so that machine actors do not need to parse error

> messages to extract information.

Reviewer: Nit: similar to earlier, this reasoning would be best in a Rationale section but I'm not going to be picky

Author: Let's leave this open so we can move it and link.

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

Author: I haven't found a good way of doing this. I'm tempted to suggest we get this PR in but raise an issue to review the new text carefully for rationale-like text - I suspect there's a fair amount of it here. Personally I'm not *hugely* against it in this particular case, mind you...

Reviewer: That's fine with me (punting)

For example consider the following message:

> An &lt;e2-medium&gt; VM instance with &lt;local-ssd=3,nvidia-t4=2&gt; is currently unavailable
> in the &lt;us-east1-a&gt; zone. Consider trying your request in the &lt;us-central1-f,us-central1-c&gt;
> zone(s), which currently has/have capacity to accommodate your request. Alternatively,
> you can try your request again with a different VM hardware configuration

> > or at a later time. For more information, see the troubleshooting documentation.

Reviewer: I think there was some copy paste format issues here with the `&lt;e2-medium&gt;` stuff

Author: Nope, this was deliberate. That's how I'd expect to represent `<` and `>` in Markdown when they're not in code. I don't know what the AIP site generator will do, but it's deliberately as it is :)

Reviewer: TIL! let's see what happens :)

Reviewer 2: I suggest checking how these HTML characters render. I'm showing a blank for the rendered zone name in the following text:

Consider trying your request in the , zone(s), which currently has/have capacity to accommodate your request. Alternatively, you can try your request again with a different VM hardware configuration or at a later time.

Author: Basically I don't know what the site generator will do - it's possible that backslashes are the way forward.

@noahdietz: How easy is it run the site generator, and will it involve installing a load of things? (If you have it set up locally and could test this, that would be really handy.)

Reviewer: @jskeet there are instructions on how to run it locally here: https://google.aip.dev/contributing#local-installation

Though I haven't been able to get it running myself - not sure if it is a python version thing or not. It's a black box to me tbh

Author: I've actually got it working now - and it looks like using the HTML escaping works, whereas backslashes don't. Once we've merged, we should immediately double check though...

Reviewer: Awesome! SGTM, resolving

The `ErrorInfo.metadata` map for the same error could be:

- "zone": "us-east1-a",
- "vmType": "e2-medium",
- "attachment": "local-ssd=3,nvidia-t4=2",

> - "zonesWithCapacity": "us-central1-f,us-central1-c"

Reviewer: Should these be formatted as code? I guess wondering why it was switched to bulleted list even though it is a "code examle"?

Author: I'm not sure... it's not *really* code - they're name/value pairs. (I replaced the example entirely, as I thought it was unrealistic - if we're going to use books, I wouldn't expect a title, but a resource name... I figured using the same example that we have for the complete error would be better.)

The commas were a mistake though.

I've reformatted each entry in the map as code - we could reformat it all as a JSON object if you'd like?

Additional contextual information that does not appear in an error message
**may** also be included in `metadata` to allow programmatic use by the client.

The metadata included for any given (reason,domain) pair can evolve over time:

- New keys **may** be included
- All keys that have been included **must** continue to be included (but may have empty values)

> In other words, once a user has observed a given key for a (reason, domain) pair they should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, once a user has observed a given key for a (reason, domain) pair they **must** be
```
stronger guidance? If not, perhaps just bold the `should`...or change to something else if you want to just make an assertion e.g. `the need to be able to rely...`

Author: Rewritten - I tend to think that every "must" and "should" ought to be aimed at the target audience of the AIP - usually the service owner, rather than the user. (Client library AIPs are slightly different.) Each should/must ought to be effectively an instruction - whereas saying "the user must be able to do something" isn't really an instruction to the subject of the verb... see what you think of this rewrite :)

Reviewer 2: LGTM.

Services **should** use these standard detail payloads when feasible.

Each type of detail payload **must** be included at most once. For
example, there **must not** be more than one [`BadRequest`][BadRequest]
message in the `details`, but there **may** be a `BadRequest` and a
[`PreconditionFailure`][PreconditionFailure].

All error responses **must** include an `ErrorInfo` within `details`. This
provides machine-readable identifiers so that users can write code against
specific aspects of the error.

The following sections describe the most common standard detail payloads.

#### ErrorInfo

The [`ErrorInfo`][ErrorInfo] message is the primary way to send a
machine-readable identifier. Contextual information **should** be
included in `metadata` in `ErrorInfo` and **must** be included if it
appears within an error message.

The `reason` field is a short snake_case description of the cause of the
error. Error reasons are unique within a particular domain of errors.
The reason **must** be at most 63 characters and match a regular expression of
`[A-Z][A-Z0-9_]+[A-Z0-9]`. (This is UPPER_SNAKE_CASE, without leading
or trailing underscores, and without leading digits.)

> The reason should be terse, but meaningful enough for a human reader to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason **should** be terse, but meaningful enough for a human reader to
```

Nit: Is this a requirement word or should we use a different one (or should we not fuss about use of requirement wrods in a non-requirement context?)

Author: I'm fine for it to be a requirement word. Added a new comment for this and the other example.

`Help` payload.

Provide this information in addition to a clear problem definition and
actionable resolution, not as an alternative to them. The linked
documentation **must** clearly relate to the error. If a single page
contains information about multiple errors, the
[`ErrorInfo.reason`](#errorinfo) value **must** be used to narrow down
the relevant information.

The `description` field is a textual description of the linked information.
This **must** be suitable to display to a user as text for a hyperlink.
This **must** be plain text (not HTML, Markdown etc).

Example `description` value: `"Troubleshooting documentation for STOCKOUT errors"`

The `url` field is the URL to link to. This **must** be an absolute URL,
including scheme.

Example `url` value:
`"https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/resource-error"`

For publicly-documented services, even those with access controls on actual
usage, the linked content **must** be accessible without authentication.

For privately-documented services, the linked content **may** require
authentication.

### Error messages

Textual error messages can be present in both `Status.message` and

> `LocalizedMessage.message` fields. Messages should be succinct but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LocalizedMessage.message` fields. Messages **should** be succinct but
```
ditto re:requirement word or not

without machine-readable identifiers, the value of `message` **must**
remain the same for any given error, as developers have previously had no
option but to use this for error handling. For more information, see
[Changing Error Messages](#changing-error-messages).

### Status.code

The `code` field is the status code, which **must** be the numeric value of
one of the elements of the [`google.rpc.Code`][Code] enum.

For example, the value `5` is the numeric value of the `NOT_FOUND`
enum element.

### Status.details

The `details` field allows messages with additional error information to
be included in the error response, each packed in a `google.protobuf.Any`
message.

Google defines a set of [standard detail payloads][details] for error
details, which cover most common needs for API errors. 
Services **should** use these standard detail payloads when feasible.

Each type of detail payload **must** be included at most once. For
example, there **must not** be more than one [`BadRequest`][BadRequest]
message in the `details`, but there **may** be a `BadRequest` and a
[`PreconditionFailure`][PreconditionFailure].

> Structured details with machine-readable identifiers **must** be used so

Author: I'm now considering removing this paragraph entirely. It's already covered later on, and the currnet "if an error message does not have a machine-readable identifier in addition to the message" effectively contradicts the requirement that we always provide an ErrorInfo.

Reviewer: Yeah I'm a little unsure of the value this paragraph is now providing. Agreed that it adds some confusion.

Author: I've tacked just "This provides machine-readable identifiers so that that users can write code against specific aspects of the error" onto the next paragraph (which was otherwise very short anyway). I think that captures the important bit.

that users can write code against specific aspects of the error. Error
message strings **may** change over time; however, if an error message
does not have a machine-readable identifier *in addition to* the message,
changing the error message **must** be considered a backwards-incompatible
change. For more information, see
[Changing Error Messages](#changing-error-messages).

> All error responses **must** include an `ErrorInfo` message within `details`.

Author: I suspect it's worth removing "message" within this sentence. Done locally (but not pushed yet).

Reviewer: Yes agreed.

```

The most important difference is that the `code` field in the JSON is an HTTP status code,
*not* the direct value of `google.rpc.Status.code`. For example, a `google.rpc.Status`
message with a `code` value of 5 would be mapped to an object including the following
code-related fields (as well as the message, details etc):

```json
{
  "error": {
    "code": 404,          // The HTTP status code for "not found"
    "status": "NOT_FOUND" // The name in google.rpc.Code for value 5
  }
}
```

The following JSON shows a fully populated HTTP/1.1+JSON representation of an error response.

```json
{
  "error": {
    "code": 429,
    "message": "The zone 'us-east1-a' does not have enough resources available to fulfill the request. Try a different zone, or try again later.",
    "status": "RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED",
    "details": [
      {
        "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.ErrorInfo",
        "reason": "RESOURCE_AVAILABILITY",
        "domain": "compute.googleapis.com",
        "metadata": {
          "zone": "us-east1-a",
          "vmType": "e2-medium",
          "attachment": "local-ssd=3,nvidia-t4=2",
          "zonesWithCapacity": "us-central1-f,us-central1-c"
        }

>       },

Reviewer 3: Is the `ErrorInfo` optional? I wonder why it wouldn't be part of the `error` itself instead of `details`

Likewise with other things like localized message, if they suppose to be only one entry, since `details` is a list of anything so, it could have many error info or localized messages.

Sorry for the confusion.

Author: As noted earlier in the AIP:

- There must *always* be an ErrorInfo. (I suspect that changing `Status` itself to include that directly would be hard in various ways.)
- There must only ever be one instance of any given message type. Yes, that's not a constraint that's expressed in the schema itself (because it can't be) but is specified in the text.

Reviewer 3: > Yes, that's not a constraint that's expressed in the schema itself (because it can't be) but is specified in the text.

Wouldn't it help the engineers to make such an invariant part of the schema itself? 

There are some breaking changes, so it is not that easy to adopt or change, but I am just curious about the motivation for using `details` for it overall.

Author: > Wouldn't it help the engineers to make such an invariant part of the schema itself?

There's no way of saying "This can use arbitrary messages, but only once per message." We could have had a message with all the "known" additional info messages, but that would have been limiting in terms of APIs wanting to add their own information outside these AIPs.

Yes, in an alternative universe we could have made `ErrorInfo` a field in `Status` - but that's not where we are, and that choice is not up for debate.

Reviewer: In a vacuum, @yordis, yes adding a concrete field to the schema would benefit developers, but there are a few points to using `details`...

1. The reality is that `google.rpc.Status` is used in a number of non-Google-specific ways, so shipping further Google-isms in the schema may be undesirable
2. `details` gives us the flexibility to add new properties without versioning `google.rpc.Status` (which would be infeasible given the breadth of usage)
3. `details` gives *anyone* i.e. non-Google users, the flexibility to add new properties without needing to change `google.rpc.Status`

Without a governance model around `google.rpc.Status` similar to that of HTTP protocol, further extending `google.rpc.Status` concretely would be a difficult task. Instead, we invest in our 1p clients offered to customers to present these well-known details in a reasonable way.

Reviewer 3: @noahdietz @jskeet, I sincerely appreciate your taking the time to explain a bit more. 

> Yes, in an alternative universe we could have made ErrorInfo a field in Status - but that's not where we are, and that choice is not up for debate.

That is precisely the confirmation I needed. It has been almost half a decade since I started reverse-engineering and tried to understand every significant business's specifications. I took massive inspiration from AIP-193 for https://github.com/straw-hat-team/adr/pull/30 (if you have some spare time, I would sincerely appreciate your participation in it, just a second try in that alternative universe).

I just wasn't confident enough about this particular scenario. Seriously, thank you so much, years trying to figure out the WHY behind it!

Reviewer: For sure, good luck @yordis, cheers!

404).

## HTTP/1.1+JSON representation

When clients use HTTP/1.1 as per [AIP-127](./0127.md), the error information
is returned in the body of the response, as a JSON object. For backward
compatibility reasons, this does not map precisely to `google.rpc.Status`,
but contains the same core information. The schema is defined in the following proto:

```proto
message Error {
  message Status {
    // The HTTP status code that corresponds to `google.rpc.Status.code`.
    int32 code = 1;
    // This corresponds to `google.rpc.Status.message`.
    string message = 2;
    // This is the enum version for `google.rpc.Status.code`.
    google.rpc.Code status = 4;
    // This corresponds to `google.rpc.Status.details`.
    repeated google.protobuf.Any details = 5;
  }

  Status error = 1;
}
```

The most important difference is that the `code` field in the JSON is an HTTP status code,
*not* the direct value of `google.rpc.Status.code`. For example, a `google.rpc.Status`
message with a `code` value of 5 would be mapped to an object including the following
code-related fields (as well as the message, details etc):

```json
{
  "error": {

>     "code": 404,          // The HTTP status code for "not found"

Reviewer: How did you get coloring in here? Cool - not sure if it will render in AIP site generator

Author: That's just GitHub saying "JSON doesn't really have comments". I think we can probably just see how it renders and fix it later if it looks really bad :)

Reviewer: TIL haha

  have to be aware of which RPCs will do what, or implement a fall-back mechanism.
  Providing `LocalizedMessage` on all RPCs allows simple and consistent client code
  to be written.

### Updating Status.message

If a client has ever observed an error with `Status.message` populated
(which it always will be) but without `ErrorInfo`, the developer of that client
may well have had to resort to parsing `Status.message` in order to find out
information beyond just what `Status.code` conveys. That information may be
found by matching specific text (e.g. "Connection closed with unknown cause")
or by parsing the message to find out metadata values (e.g. a region with
insufficient resources). At that point, `Status.message` is implicitly part
of the API contract, so **must not** be updated - that would be a breaking
change. This is one reason for introducing `LocalizedMessage` into the
`Status.details`.

RPCs which have **always** included `ErrorInfo` are in a better position:
the contract is then more about the stability of `ErrorInfo` for any given
error: the reason and domain need to be consistent over time, and the

> metadata provided for any given (reason,domain) can only be expanded.

Reviewer: Nit: Is it OK to have multiple colons in the same sentence?

Author: No, it's horrible - sorry about that. I think changing the second colon to a period would be better. Will do that locally, but not create a commit just for that. (I'll wait until we get more feedback to avoid a storm of tiny commits.)
